Skálholt is one of the most historically important places in Iceland; as the seat of the first Bishop in the 11th century CE, it grew to become a major cultural and political centre for the next seven centuries. The diocese of Skálholt stretched over two-thirds of the island and the Bishop’s seat itself was one of the largest settlements in the country. Art, literature and politics were all concentrated here as well as a school for the education of the country’s (male) elite class. Its prestige only came to an end with the close of the 18th century as the see was moved to the newly established town of Reykjavík – now of course, the capital of Iceland.
Major archaeological excavations took place at Skálholt over six seasons, between 2002 and 2007. The work was part of a national, five-year programme of millennial funding for cultural projects to celebrate a thousand years of Christianity in Iceland (Kristnihátíðarsjóður). The investigations were largely confined to an open area encompassing the core of the settlement and which can be explored using the interactive map. The excavations fully uncovered the remains of structural activity from c. 1720-1950, but only partially from c. 1650-1720 and nothing earlier. Besides the main area, several smaller interventions were made on the periphery of the settlement, including a long trench across a mound to the west, and 9 test pits along an extensive midden zone just south of/outside the main settlement boundary wall.
The use of archival material – maps, photographs and other documents - was invaluable in understanding the site, both spatially and chronologically. Besides the obvious benefit of being able to identify room functions, appearance and even internal furnishings and layout, they also helped in the interpretation of the less well-preserved buildings. Many structures had been damaged, almost beyond visibility and it was only through such archival sources that they were interpreted as buildings at all. The most important written sources were the regular inventories (úttektar) taken at the accession of a new Bishop, transcripts of which can be found under Project Data on this website. The originals of these documents are housed at the National Archives (Þjóðskjalasafn Íslands) under the Episcopal Archives (Biskups skalasafn, abbrev. Bps). Other key sources include various maps from the mid 18th century and later.
The excavations were directed by Gavin Lucas and Mjöll Snæsdóttir with a team of core staff: Andrew Hall, Ágústa Edwald, Candy Hatherley, Birna Lárusdóttir, Elín Hreiðarsdóttir, Lilja Björk Pálsdóttir, Óskar Gísli Sveinbjarnarson, Sigríður Þorgeirsdóttir, Sólveig Guðmunsdóttir Beck and Uggi Ævarsson. Besides this core, staff, we had a number of people working for one or occasionally two seasons: Oddgeir Hansson, Orri Vésteinsson, Richard Turnbull, Marcus Abbott, Andrew Clarke, Guðrún Alda Gísladóttir, Jane Hamill, Cassian Hall, Mike Church, Dmitri Tarat, Auður Hálldórsdóttir, Natascha Mehler, Oscar Aldred, Óskar Leifur Arnarson and Hrönn Konraðsdóttir.
This website was created by Hallur Kristinn Hallson and Jaan Jaerving under the supervision of Matthias Book and Gavin Lucas.